Add Date aggregation {wip} (#1585)
enkidevs/curriculum: mongodb/intro/date-aggregation/aggregation-with-date-expression-operators-ii.md

---
author: Stefan-Stojanovic

aspects:
  - introduction

>   - new

Reviewer: we need to move the `aspects` on the workout level (i.e. remove the `aspects` field from all the insights and add it in the workout README)

also, I think we should use different aspects. I think `workout` and `deep` are good for this workout

type: normal

category: how to

---

# Aggregation With `$year`, `$month` and `$dayOfMonth`

---
## Content

Now that we know how to extract the date into an ISODate format, we can use some aggregation operators to find the exact time that the document was made as precise as in milliseconds.

> **Note:** For easier readability and comprehension of date operators, we will be using the date from the `name:"Bulbasaur"` document shown in the previous insight. **(The document will also be in the footnotes of every insight of this workout under Previous Document[1])**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 💡 For easier readability and comprehension of date operators, we will be using the date from the `name: "Bulbasaur"` document shown in the previous insight. **(The document will also be in the footnotes of every insight of this workout under Previous Document[1])**
```

> **Note:** All 10 date operators have the same syntax:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All date operators have the same syntax:
```

```js
{
  $DATE_OPERATOR: <expression>
}
```

### $year

The `$year` operator is used to find the year the document was created.

> Since we are only looking for the date of a specific document, we will use the `$match` stage to only match the document we want. Also, we will use the `$project` stage to only aggregate the parts of the date we want.

Reviewer: I'm not sure "aggregate" is the right word here. how does this sound?
```suggestion
Since we are only looking for the date of a specific document, we will use the `$match` stage to only match the document we want. We'll use the `$project` stage to display only the parts of the date we want.
```

Example:
```javascript
db.pokedex.aggregate([
  { $match: { name: "Bulbasaur" } },
  {
    $project: {
      createdAtYear: { $year: "$createdAt" }
    }
  }
]);

```
Output:
```javascript
{
  "_id": ObjectId("5d9d8a5a0b24990f19398208"),
  "createdAtYear": 2019
}
```

> As you can see in the example above, the `$match` stage was used to match the pokémon document named `"Bulbasaur"` and get the year it was created.

Reviewer: how does this sound?
```suggestion
We use the `$match` to find the pokémon document named `"Bulbasaur"`. Then, we extract the creation year in the `project` stage.
```

The "createdAt" in `createdAtYear: { $year: "$createdAt" }` is just how we named our date field after we extracted the date with the `.getTimestamp()` method.

> **Note:** Just like with any aggregation, if we don't exclude the `_id` with the project stage, it will be displayed by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 💡 Just like with any aggregation, if we don't exclude the `_id` with the project stage, it will be displayed by default.
```

Since we already know the exact document and its `ObjectId` we can exclude it to only output the Date.

Example with `_id` excluded:
```javascript
db.pokedex.aggregate([
  { $match: { name: "Bulbasaur" } },
  {
    $project: {
      createdAtYear: { $year: "$createdAt" },
      _id: 0
    }
  }
]);

```
Output:
```javascript
{
  "createdAtYear": 2019
}

> ```

Reviewer: I think we can remove this since we expect users to know how to exclude the `_id` in the `$project` stage and we exclude the `_id` in the following example (`$month`)

### $month

The `$month` operator is used to find the month the document was created on. The output goes from `1` to `12`, with `1` being January and `12` being December.

```js
db.pokedex.aggregate([
  { $match: { name: "Bulbasaur" } },
  {
    $project: {
      createdAtMonth: { $month: "$createdAt" },
      _id: 0
    }
  }
]);

```

Output:
```javascript
{
  "createdAtMonth": 10
}
```
### $dayOfMonth

> The `$dayOfMonth` operator is used to find the day of the month the document was created on. The output goes from `1`  to `31`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `$dayOfMonth` operator is used to find the day of the month the document was created on. The output goes from `1` to `31`.
```

```js
db.pokedex.aggregate([
  { $match: { name: "Bulbasaur" } },
  {
    $project: {
      dayOfTheMonth: {
        $dayOfMonth: "$createdAt"
      },
      _id: 0
    }
  }
]);

```

Output:
```javascript
{
  "dayOfTheMonth" : 9
}
```

---

> ## Practice

Reviewer: can we add a revision question for this insight?

something like 

Complete the query to get this output:

```js
db.collection.aggregate([
  { $match: { ... } },
  { $project: {
    _id: 0,
    birthDay: { $dayOfMonth: "$birthDate" },
    birthMonth: { $month: "$birthData },
  } }
])

// Output:
{
  // ...
}
```

- $dayOfMonth
- $month

> Fill in the blanks:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Fill in the blanks:
```

The ??? operator is used to extract the year portion of the ISODate.

> The ??? operator is used to extract the month the document was made as a ???

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ??? operator is used to extract the month the document was made as a ???.
```

---
author: Stefan-Stojanovic

> levels:

Reviewer 2: I don't think these are needed anymore, we should remove them

Reviewer: @Stefan-Stojanovic can you remove the levels?

---

# Aggregation With `$year`, `$month` and `$dayOfMonth`

---
## Content

Now that we know how to extract the date into an ISODate format, we can use some aggregation operators to find the exact time that the document was made as precise as in milliseconds.

**Note:** For easier readability and comprehension of date operators, we will be using the date from the `name:"Bulbasaur"` document shown in the previous insight. **(The document will also be in the footnotes of every insight of this workout under Previous Document[1])**

**Note:** All 10 date operators have the same syntax:

```js
{
  $DATE_OPERATOR: <expression>
}
```

### $year

The `$year` operator is used to find the year the document was created.

Since we are only looking for the date of a specific document, we will use the `$match` stage to only match the document we want. Also, we will use the `$project` stage to only aggregate the parts of the date we want.

Example:
```javascript
db.pokedex.aggregate([
  { $match: { name: "Bulbasaur" } },
  {
    $project: {
      year: { $year: "$Date" }
    }
  }
]);

```
Output:
```javascript
{
  "_id": ObjectId("5d9d8a5a0b24990f19398208"),
  "year" : 2019
}
```

> As you can see in the example above, the `$match` stage was used to match the pokémon(document) named "Bulbasaur" and get the year it was created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you can see in the example above, the `$match` stage was used to match the pokémon(document) named `"Bulbasaur"` and get the year it was created.
```

Reviewer 2: Also why collectionName(document) format?

> pokémon(document)

Reviewer: I don't think  it references the format, but rather that a pokemon is a document. I can change it to `pokemon (a document)` or just remove the parentheses entirelly. What do you think?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you can see in the example above, the `$match` stage was used to match the pokémon document named `"Bulbasaur"` and get the year it was created.
```

      _id: 0
    }
  }
]);

```

Output:
```javascript
{
  "Month" : 10
}
```
### $dayOfMonth

The `$dayOfMonth` operator is used to find the day of the month the document was created on. The output goes from 1-31.

```js
db.pokedex.aggregate([
  { $match: { name: "Bulbasaur" } },
  {
    $project: {
      DayOfTheMonth: {
        $dayOfMonth: "$Date"
      },
      _id: 0
    }
  }
]);

```

Output:
```javascript
{
  "DayOfTheMonth" : 9
}
```

---
## Practice
Fill in the blanks:

The ??? operator is used to extract the year portion of the ISODate.
The ??? operator is used to extract the month the document was made as a ???
The ??? operator is used to extract the day of the month the document was created on.

* `$year`
* `$month`
* `number from 1-12`
* `$dayOfMonth`
* `$day`
* `Word, January-December`

---
## Footnotes

[1:Previous Document]
Here is the document used in the previous insight:
```javascript
// document without the date
{ 
	"_id": ObjectId("5d9d8a6a0b24990f19398209"),
  "name": "Bulbasaur",
	"type": "Grass"
}
// Document with the date
{ 
	"_id": ObjectId("5d9d8a6a0b24990f19398209"),
  "name": "Bulbasaur",
	"type": "Grass",
  "Date": ISODate("2019-10-09T07:21:14Z")
}

> ```

Reviewer: this code block still looks a bit weird

>   "Date": ISODate("2019-10-09T07:21:14Z")

Reviewer 2: It's a little confusing that this field is capitalized while all others aren't.

If we wanted to distinguish it, how about we name it something like `createdAt`? We'll need to make sure all affected insights are changed

Author: The only reason I capitalized it, is because I added it as a new field after conversion. What should I do?

Reviewer: see this thread:

https://github.com/enkidevs/curriculum/pull/1585/files#r354303940

---
author: Stefan-Stojanovic

levels:
  - beginner
  - basic
  
aspects:
  - introduction
  - new

type: normal

category: how to

---

> # Aggregation With $year, $month and $dayOfMonth

Author: Sure
